there's nothing more uncomfortable than
having to terminate somebody worse yet
is keeping somebody on staff who's
costing you time money problems and
creating a nightmare inside your
organization having to let someone go
sucks it's a conversation none of us
want to have but the advice I'm going to
give you today is going to make all of
that much easier all right let's get to
it
welcome to this edition of build your
tribe my name is Charlene Johnson I am
the co-host of this podcast along with
my son Brock Johnson and today we're
going to talk about something that I've
had to do a lot of over the course of my
I guess 25 years as a boss been in
business for more than 35 years but
employees I think the very first time I
had to let somebody go was about 20
years ago it's not comfortable it's
awkward it can also land you in a lot of
legal trouble so in this brief episode
I'm going to share with you like beyond
the Practical tips beyond the thing
things that you're going to read if you
just do a quick Google search and share
with you my my personal opinion as well
as some personal experiences that I
think should make this a little easier
for you I don't know if he's the
originator of this quote but I do
remember hearing it first from Brian
Tracy and that is to hire slow and Fire
fast and while I wish that that were
true I personally have found that it's
we've always had to let go of somebody
and ended up letting go of them long
after we should have
and I I don't know if there's a way to
fire somebody fast the only time that we
ever did fire somebody fast we got sued
it was completely frivolous this person
claimed that we were being ageist
against them and and they sued us for
age discrimination lovely now they knew
they weren't going to win but they also
knew that it was a really easy way to
get us to settle the case and you just
don't want to be in that kind of
situation so here's some advice that I
want to share with you things that have
made it much easier because it's awkward
like having to let somebody go and for
some reason it always happens like just
before their birthday or then you
realize like oh my gosh their wife's
about to give birth or we're coming up
on the holiday season like in your head
you have all of these very humanistic
reasons why you don't want to let this
person go like maybe you know too much
about their personal life but at the end
of the day it's business it's also one
of the reasons why
in my estimation you just don't ever
want to cross that line where now your
friendship has become more important
than the work that they do for you
you're in business and it has to be
personal in order for people to want to
work hard for you but by the same token
it's business and if it becomes too
personal then you end up keeping people
on where you're doing them disservice
you're doing all the other people who
work for you a great disservice and in
the long run it ends up costing
everybody
so the first thing I want to say is
you've got to document it everything
needs to go on writing I know that we're
all very comfortable with slack and
texting and WhatsApp and Asana messages
but when you know this person is not
meeting expectations number one I like
to start by sending an email quoting and
writing a reminder of the expectations
and responsibilities for their role and
then just letting them know like you
know just I want to make sure to
reiterate these are the expectations if
there's any problems or any areas where
you see concern please let me know this
is sometimes something I will do even
before I give them their first warning
in my mind it's like oh I feel like a
warning's coming and before I give them
that warning I want to reiterate
expectations I also try to approach
every single person with rare exception
from the standpoint of like you know
what maybe they're going through
something right now and I want to give
them the best of the doubt we're not
robots people go through things there
might be something happening in their
personal life that you're just not even
aware of so when it's someone who's
normally phenomenal they're a fantastic
asset to your team but for whatever
reason like things just aren't going the
way they normally do like this person is
missing deadlines they're just not
performing the way they normally do in
that situation like nine times out of
ten that's not something I need to fire
that's something I need to have a
conversation with that's somebody who I
might need to know what's going on in
their personal life if they're
comfortable sharing that with me so I
can have somebody else step in and help
them out for a little while because that
person is too valuable for me to lose
them just because they're a human and
they're going through something so first
I would just have a conversation with
them if they're missing the mark let
them know what the expectations are and
if you've got a good relationship with
them they probably will come to you
before you even come to them and that
employ the person who your staff member
who's very conscientious they hate it
when they know they're not giving you
their best which is very different from
the person who's trying to get away with
the least
in that situation where you you know
you've hired someone who just doesn't
have the right mentality for the culture
of your business or they think of their
job as a job as opposed to an important
role or a key member of your team
so they're just mailing it in and
they've got this mentality where they
want to do less and less and less like
they know they're getting paid full-time
but they're not doing full-time work and
they're just waiting for somebody to
bust them
call them out on it figure things out
before they step up and take full
responsibility that that's someone who's
treating their role as a job and I think
that's a disservice because there's
somebody who would love to do their role
who would live for that position it
would be exciting for them to be a
challenge it would be an honor to work
with you so never feel like well this is
just a low level or a low paying
position there's somebody out there
who's dying for that role you don't want
to have somebody in a role who's just
complacent resentful uninspired and the
way you handle that is by first document
and so again sharing with them their
expectations then your next step is to
to have a meeting and reiterate I always
start with like here's all the positive
and then rather than saying like here's
all the ways that you're missing the
mark
I will have them evaluate themselves
I'll say all right so let's let's take a
look at the responsibilities that are
you know part of those expectations that
I love for you and and I you just share
with me your thoughts on how well you're
doing in each of these areas
and I would say again like 90 of the
time when I've done that with someone
it's usually emotional like they know
and a lot of times they feel bad about
it
and I'd say 50 of the time 50 of the
situations where I've done that the
person has said I don't know if this
role is right for me I'm in over my head
or I've taken interest in something else
or I've lost interest and I should
probably turn in my resignation
let's just say from a legal standpoint
you are in a much better position if
somebody just mutually agrees that it's
not the right role it's easier for you
it's easier for them emotionally like
nobody wants to be fired nobody wants to
be terminated nobody wants that Mark on
their record and you don't want to have
to do that to someone most of us are
self-aware enough
that if given the right opportunity to
evaluate our strengths and weaknesses
and our job performance we're going to
do so honestly and we're going to
recognize that we're missing the mark
and gracefully step down
I found that to be true most of the time
now let me tell you some things that I
found don't work and that is going to
the person and confronting them with all
the ways that they've missed the mark
now sometimes you have to do this but if
you're doing this with someone who is
not very self-aware
they will become defensive
even though you're the boss they will
tell you all the reasons why you're the
reason for their low performance and
it's awkward and in that case you just
have to stick with the facts so my next
tip for you is to be overly prepared
that means you even if you haven't
sent them a formal write-up or an
evaluation you need to have the moment
this person starts slipping you need to
document it without any embellishment
like just the facts on such and such
date this project was due and it was
late by this many days and you just list
it day by day week by week event by
event with just the facts
and again it just boils down to having a
meeting with them and I will lay that
out for them and say okay so I want you
to take a look at this and what would
you do if you were in my shoes
100 of the time
when I've approached it from that
standpoint like letting the other person
tell me what they would do if they were
me 100 of the time I've had the other
person say this is not good I would get
rid of me
and in which case I don't terminate I
say well if we're both in agreement that
maybe this isn't the right fit am I
assuming this is your notice
and that's just a nice way to kind of
like let the person off the hook
you know it allows them to kind of walk
out with the upper hand if you will like
they were able to make the decision that
they wanted to step down versus you
saying listen you blew it and I'm
letting you go
letting go of someone in terminating
someone is is not fun and it's very very
expensive
I've also seen so many of the members in
the marketing impact Academy people that
we coach I've seen them get termination
happy meaning they've hired somebody
who's great they're just not great in
some of the areas that they had hired
them for but they're great in other
areas in which case I always say if you
find someone who fits your culture who's
got the right attitude and who's really
good at some other things then
restructure their job maybe you're
offering them fewer hours maybe you're
putting them in a different position but
if just finding people who've got the
right attitude fit your culture and want
to work really hard that is so
invaluable that sometimes it means like
readjusting changing the way that
they're paid or changing their their job
title or finding something else for them
to do that really helps and supports
your business because it's really hard
to find people who are the right fit and
can do all the things that they said
they could do during their interview
there's been some times that we've
interviewed people I'm like this person
is going to take our business and 10x it
and then they end up being phenomenal
answering the phones like
and and that's okay like keep that
person around the same can sometimes be
true of even consultants and agencies
there have been agencies we've worked
with where it's like oh wow we are
paying them way too much but I really
like these people however they promised
us X Y and Z and they're only giving us
Z therefore let's renegotiate what this
contract looks like and they can just
provide us with Z because they're really
good at Z and we'll go get a different
Agency for X and Y so always take a look
at what is salvageable because in the
long run it's not what you know that's
going to grow your business it's who you
have on your team that's going to help
you grow your team and grow your
business and one last really important
tip when in doubt like you feel like
this is going to be sticky and tricky
and I feel like this person is going to
be vindictive they're going to cause a
lot of problems they could take clients
with them they could sue us they you
know they could just turn things upside
down like one lawsuit could put a
company out of business in that case it
will behoove you to get legal advice now
you can do this through an organization
like ADP if you use them for payroll a
lot of the payroll services also offer
HR Consulting which is great but when in
doubt like spend the money even if it's
just a one or two hour consultation with
an attorney
an attorney who specializes in labor law
just spending you know four hundred
dollars could save you forty thousand
four hundred thousand dollars and a
legal nightmare
so when it comes to sticky situations
I'm telling you legal advice is worth
its weight in gold hey it's my goal to
be brief to be bright to make it fun and
then be done I hope I've made a topic
that is not very fun a little bit more
fun hopefully I've made a little bit
easier on you and I just really want to
thank you for spending this time with me
here on build your tribe don't forget to
double check and make sure that you're
subscribed and you've got just a moment
would love for you to leave a five-star
review on whatever app you're listening
to this on
thank you
[Music]